- [Instructor] The next collection interface
will explore deque extends the queue interface
and include some other ways that we can work
with the linear collection of elements.
The deque interface was introduced in Java six,
adding a double ended queue to the collections framework.
A deque allows elements to be added or removed
from both ends of its linear structure.
We'll refer to these as the front and the back.
However, you might also hear them referred to
as the front and rear or the head and tail.
Operations on both ends of the deque
are performed by using a set of methods with names
that are derived from the methods on the queue interface.
These methods make the deque very versatile.
In the last lesson, we used an array deque as a queue
with a first in, first out approach,
but it can also handle elements using a last in
first out approach that allows it to be used as a stack.
In fact, Java has a legacy stack implementation
in the Java.util package, but the Java docs
recommend using an array deque instead.
Let's move on and take a look at
some of the interface methods on the deque.
To add elements to the front of a deque,
the methods add an offer from the queue interface
are suffix with the word first.
The suffix first is used to indicate
that the operations are performed
on the front of the structure.
If we attempt to add an element to a bounded deque
that is full, these methods will behave the same way
as their counterparts found on the queue.
So add first will throw an exception,
and offer first will return false.
This naming pattern and the exception behavior
is applied across many methods on the deque.
For example, inserting elements from the back of the deque
is achieved using the add last and offer last methods.
So here the suffix last is applied to the method names
from the queue interface to specify that operations
are performed on the back of the deque.
Removing elements from the front of the deque
is performed with methods named remove first and pull first.
So again, you see the pattern.
We take the queue method name and add the suffix first
or last depending upon what end of the deque
we're working on.
If you've picked up the pattern,
you might've been able to guess that the names
of the methods use to remove elements
from the back of the deque are removed last and pull last.
If we want to examine the front of the deque,
we can use get first or peek first.
Here, you'll notice the interface uses the verb get
instead of element, which is what we find on the queue.
Finally, if you want to examine the element
in the back of the deque,
we can use the get last or peek last methods.
When you place these methods together,
you can see the versatility provided by the deque,
but that's not where it ends because the deque
also has methods that allow it to function as a stack.
A stack is another type of data structure that uses last in
first out order or lifeboat.
It works similar to a stack of dinner plates.
We stack plates one on top of the other when storing them.
Then when we need to retrieve a plate,
the last plate placed on the stack
is the first one removed from it.
That's lifeboat order
and it's exactly how a stack works.
To work with the deque as a stack,
we use the methods push, pop, and peek.
If we envision the stack as a vertical structure
with a top and a bottom,
these three operations are performed at its top.
Using these operations,
we can push an element into the stack for storage,
peek at the top element or pop an element to remove it
from the top.
Now that we've seen the structure of a deque
and learned its operations,
let's switch over to our next lesson
and see some code examples.